              Running head: SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                         1 
               
               
                                                                             
               
                                                                                       th
                        Sample APA Paper for Students Interested in Learning APA Style 6  Edition 
                                                    Jeffrey H. Kahn 
                                                Illinois State University 
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
                                                      Author Note 
                     Jeffrey H. Kahn, Department of Psychology, Illinois State University. 
                     Correspondence concerning this sample paper should be addressed to Jeffrey H. Kahn, 
              Department of Psychology, Illinois State University, Campus Box 4620, Normal, Illinois     
              6179-4620. Email: jhkahn@ilstu.edu. 
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                                                                           2 
        
                              
                           Abstract 
       The abstract should be a single paragraph in block format (without paragraph indentation), and 
       the appropriate length depends on the journal to which you are submitting, but they are typically 
       between 150 and 200 words. Section 2.03 of the American Psychological Manual has additional 
       information about the abstract. The abstract is important because many journal readers first read 
       the abstract to determine if the entire article is worth reading. The abstract should briefly 
       describe all four parts of an empirical paper (i.e., Introduction, Method, Results, and Discussion). 
       Consider writing one or two sentences summarizing each part of a paper, and you’ll have a nice 
       abstract. 
                               
                               
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                                                                           3 
        
        
              Sample APA Paper for Students Interested in Learning APA Style 
          Before getting started you will notice some things about this paper. First, everything is 
       double-spaced. Second, margins are 1-inch wide on all sides. Third, there are several headings 
       used throughout to separate different parts of the paper; some of the headings are in bold.  
       Fourth, there is exactly one space after each punctuation mark. Fifth, the upper left of each page 
       has a running head in capital letters, and the upper right has the page number.  
          This first part of the paper is called the “Introduction” section or “Literature Review”, yet 
       it does not have a heading that actually says “Introduction”. Instead, the title of the paper is typed 
       at the top of the first page (centered, but do not put it in bold). The importance of the topic 
       should be pretty clear from the first paragraph or two of the Introduction. Section 2.05 of the 
       APA manual (APA, 2010) will help give you some ideas about how to write this. 
          The bulk of the Introduction section is background literature on the topic, often helpful to 
       provide a theoretical or empirical basis for your research. Remember to cite your sources often in 
       the Introduction and throughout the manuscript. Articles and books are cited the same way in the 
       text, yet they appear different on the References page. For, example, an article by Cronbach and 
       Meel (1955) and a book by Bandura (1986) are written with the author’s name and the year of 
       publication in parentheses. However, if you look on the References page they look a little 
       different. Remember that APA style does not use footnotes or anything else for citations. Two 
       other things about citations are important. When a citation is written inside parentheses (e.g., 
       Cronbach & Meehl, 1959), an ampersand is used between authors’ names instead of the word 
       “and.” Second, when citing an author’s work using quotations, be sure to include a page number. 
       For example, Rogers (1961) once wrote that "the core of man's nature is essentially positive" 
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                                                                           4 
        
       (p.73) Notice that the page number is included here. Unless a direct quote is taken from a source, 
       the page number is not included. 
          The last section of the Introduction states the purpose of the research. Hypotheses are 
       also included here. State your hypotheses as a prediction (e.g., “I predicted that...”), and try to 
       avoid using passive tense (e.g., “It was predicted that…”). You will notice that hypotheses are 
       written in past tense because you are describing a study you have finished. 
                            Method 
          The Method section is the second of four main parts of an empirical paper (see Section 
       2.06 of the APA [2010] manual). Papers that are reviews of literature would not have a Method 
       section. There are typically three or four major subsection in the Method although there can be 
       more. These subsection are separated by headings described in sections 3.02 and 3.03 of the 
       APA manual (APA, 2010).  
       Participants   
          This brief section describes the people who participated in your study. (They should be 
       called “participants” not “subjects”.) Mention the number of participants, the percentage of 
       women and men, the mean age (where “mean” is abbreviated M), variability, and their ethnicity 
       or cultural background. Any other demographic information describing your sample would be 
       appropriate here. 
       Materials 
          This section describes the tests, surveys, or instruments used to collect data. For example, 
       if you used the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale in your research, you might say that 
       the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale (MCSD; Crowne & Marlowe, 1960) comprises 
       33 true-false items that measure social desirability. You would also provide the reader with 
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                                                                           5 
        
       information regarding the MCSD scale’s reliability and validity. Do this for each and every 
       measure used in the study. If the purpose of your paper is to develop a new questionnaire, you 
       may wish to describe reliability and validity in the Results section (see below).  
       Procedure 
          This section describes in great detail the data-collecting procedures. Describe things like 
       participants recruited, whether they participated alone or in groups, how informed consent or 
       assent was obtained, what they were asked to do or how they were compensated for their 
       participation. You should describe the procedure in enough detail that another researcher could 
       conduct the same study (i.e., replicate it) just by reading about the procedure.   
                            Results 
          This is the section where the results of the data analyses are presented. Section 2.07 in the 
       APA manual (APA, 2010) will help a little bit. It’s often helpful to use tables (see Table) to help 
       describe your results, especially when you have a lot of data to report. 
          You may find it helpful to remind the reader of the hypothesis before presenting each 
       result. It is also a good idea to tell the reader what type of data analysis was done (e.g., 
       correlation, ANOVA) before it is presented. State what alpha level you adopted; an alpha level 
       of .05 is the standard. You don’t interpret or explain your results here. It is appropriate to state 
       whether or not your hypotheses were supported, just don’t try to explain them—that’s why you 
       have the Discussion section.   
                            Discussion 
          The Discussion is the fourth and final section of the paper. This is the part where you 
       interpret and explain your results. Try to explain why you found what you did in your study. Is it 
       what you predicted? If not, why? Also, how do your findings fit in with information in your 
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                                                                           6 
        
       Introduction? Are your results consistent or inconsistent with what has been found in the past? If 
       they are inconsistent, how can you explain this? The explanation and interpretation of results will 
       probably be the biggest part of the Discussion. 
          There are at least two additional parts of the discussion. First, include limitations of the 
       study. Describe the ways in which the internal or external validity of the study may have been 
       compromised. Future research ideas are often discussed when limitations are discussed. 
          Second, describe the implications of your findings to theory or practice. Answer the 
       question, “How does my study add to psychological theory?” In addition, think about practical 
       applications of your findings. Perhaps give some additional directions for future research. 
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
                              
                              
                              
                              
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                                                                           7 
        
                           References 
       American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American Psychological 
            Association (6th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.                                                             
       Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.   
          Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.                                                                        
       Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychological
          Bulletin, 52, 281-302. doi:10.1037/h0040957                                                               
       Crowne, C. P., & Marlowe, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability independent of
          psychopathology. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 24, 349-354. doi:10.1037/h0047358 
       Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
          
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                                                                           8 
        
       Table  
       Sample Table Describing Fake Data 
                                     Variable 1                        Variable 2 
                              
       Group                     M                  SD               M                 SD  
                                
       Men (n =100)          32.61              8.95           17.08              5.25 
                               
       Women (n = 80)        33.02              9.17           16.94              5.13 
       Note. These data were totally made up. They are just presented to give you an idea about how to 
       present information in a table. 
        
                                   
