            Running head: A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER                                 1 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                          Your Fully Explanatory Title: In About a Dozen Words or So 
                                        Your Professional Name 
                                         Upper Iowa University 
      A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER          2 
                        Abstract 
      Here, with no indentation at all, summarize your study and its results in 100 to 150 words.  Focus 
      less on your intentions or the importance of your topic than the work you did and the results you 
      found.  The truth is that some people never read the full paper; they just read the abstract or 
      executive summary and use the body of the paper as if it were an extended footnote.  So make 
      sure this abstract tells the whole story.  This, like everything else in your paper without 
      exception, is in 12-point Times Roman font, double-spaced, with one-inch margins in all 
      directions.  Please note that the title “Abstract” (like the title “References” and the title of your 
      paper) is not bolded.  Only headings, sub-headings, and the rare third-level headings are bolded. 
          A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER                            3 
                    Your Fully Explanatory Title: In About a Dozen Words or So 
              Your paper begins right away with an introduction, but without the title “Introduction,” 
                                   th
          which is never used in APA.  New to the 6  edition of the Publication Manual, we are putting 
          two spaces after each sentence.  This is natural for many of us and is a welcomed change from 
          the previous instruction to leave only one space.  Every page, including the first page, has a short 
          title at the left and a simple page number, flush right.  On the first page only, that short title is 
          preceded by “Running head:” All of that is placed within the one-inch margin (i.e., one-half inch 
          below the top of the paper). 
              Be sure to use TAB to move to positions such as the right margin, or to make a half-inch 
          indent.  It is not enough to hit the Space bar over and over until the position looks right.  That is 
          not robust and any change in the document will disrupt it. 
              The abstract, main body, and reference sections each begin on a brand new page.  This is 
          accomplished in Microsoft Word by using Control-Enter.  It is not enough to keep hitting the 
          Enter key until the page advances, because any change in the document will disrupt that … use 
          Control-Enter. 
              However, everything else in the paper stays wherever it is.  For example, if a new 
          heading or sub-heading appears at the bottom of a page, and it would make sense to just move it 
          to the next page, do not do so.  Leave it there, no matter how it looks, and never hit Enter twice 
          to create a blank line.  To make sure these details are handled according to APA rules, some of 
          the default settings of Microsoft Word have to be over-ridden. 
                              Preparing Microsoft Word 
              Under the Home tab at the top of the page, there is a menu item for Paragraph.  Clicking 
          the arrow in its bottom right corner opens a dialog box with more choices.  On the first page of 
      A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER          4 
      that dialog box (called Indents and Spacing), select double spacing, and click the box that says, 
      “Don’t add space between paragraphs of the same style.”  This prevents the software from 
      making an exception to the double spacing when you hit Enter, which is not allowed in APA.  
      Later, we will come back to this same location to create “Hanging Indents” in the References 
      section. 
         On the second page of that same dialog box (called Line and Page Breaks), clear the box 
      that is marked, “Widow/Orphan control.”  This prevents the software from moving one or two 
      lines of text from the bottom of a page onto the next page, to make the document look better.  
      Keep in mind that it is not the goal of APA format to make the document look nice.  On the 
      contrary, it is the goal of APA format to make the document look dry, cautious, unadventurous, 
      credible, and thus authoritative. 
         The title page requires three elements: the full title of the paper, your formal name, and 
      your affiliation (Upper Iowa University).  Your instructor may ask for more information, such as 
      which campus you are at, the due date, or course information.  That is fine, as long as the three 
      required elements are there.  All that information is centered on the page and appears (at the 
      bottom of) the top half of the page (more or less centered vertically as well as horizontally). 
         Remember that everything is double-spaced, without exception, and that there is never a 
      blank line anywhere (i.e., the ENTER key is not pressed twice in a row). 
                      In-Text Citations 
         All research is cited; any idea that you found anywhere is identified as such.  You might 
      think that this detracts from your work, because you are using other people’s ideas, but that is not 
      the case.  The fact that your claim comes from a proper source strengthens your argument.  You 
      are not expected to generate brand new ideas, just to gather ideas together and apply them to new 
      A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER          5 
      situations. 
         Every citation in the paper must have a corresponding entry in the reference section at the 
      end, and nothing that is not cited in the paper may appear in that reference section.  Remember 
      that the reference section is not a bibliography of related articles or a list of sources that you 
      claim to have read.  It merely provides the details of the sources you mentioned, so a curious 
      reader can find them and follow up, if desired. 
         You can use a signal phrase in your papers or cite at the end of the sentence.  A signal 
      phrase is an indication to the reader that the writer is referencing a source. For example: Lyttle 
      (2001) found that Dilbert humor increased the persuasiveness of a business ethics training 
      exercise.  You can also cite at the end of the sentence: Dilbert humor increased the 
      persuasiveness of a business ethics training exercise (Lyttle, 2001).   
      Quotations 
         If you quote anything at all, even one phrase, then you must include it within quotation 
      marks and “cite the exact page on which it was found” (Author, 1999, p. 126).  This is one of 
      many reasons to avoid direct quotes and, instead, paraphrase what you have read in your own 
      words.  Note that the whole citation appears within the sentence; there is no sentence-ending 
      period until after the citation.  The helps link the citation to the idea it is supporting. 
         If 40 or more words are quoted (rarely a good idea for a short paper, since you are being 
         graded on your contribution to the discussion), they are presented as part of a block.  The 
         entire quotation is indented one-half inch, instead of using quotation marks (there are no 
         quotation marks).  The citation in parentheses follows the period at the end of the last 
         sentence, since there is no ambiguity about what is being documented.  Naturally, 
         because it is a quote, the citation includes the page(s) on which the quote can be found.  
      A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER          6 
         (Author, 1999, pp. 128-129) 
      The next paragraph can begin at the left margin, without any indent, so that it is not confused 
      with the block quotation above it.  However, as always, do not insert a blank line for spacing. 
      Authors 
         Sources by two authors are always cited like this (First & Second, 1994) and sources with 
      six or more authors are always cited like this (First et al., 1955).  However, sources with three, 
      four, or five authors are handled differently. 
         The first time the source is mentioned, all of the authors are listed (First, Second, Third, 
      & Fourth, 1984).  If and when the same article is mentioned again in the same paper, the 
      following citation form is used (First et al., 1984). 
         If the author is an organization, the name of that organization is specified as if it were a 
      personal author (American Psychological Association, 2010).  If you find a suitable source 
      without an identifiable author, the citation begins with the first few words of the title (“New 
      Study Shows,” 2001). 
         An interview, letter, or other personal communication is cited like this (J. Lyttle, personal 
      communication, January 31, 2011), and there is no matching entry in the references list.  
      Secondary Sources 
         Secondary sources are cited like this (Author, 1905, as cited in Citer, 2011, p. 6).  These 
      should be used sparingly in academic work, because we should try to read the original source (or 
      its English translation, at least) and not trust a citer’s interpretation of what the author meant.  
      Thus, citing your textbook is rarely appropriate.  Unless your textbook is an original source, or 
      an anthology of sources, it is a secondary source.  It is designed to give you a summary or 
      overview of the literature.  Anything it discusses should be cited in its footnotes or endnotes, so 
      A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER          7 
      you can look up the actual source. 
                        APA Style 
      Seriation 
         Seriation is a fancy word for lists.  Lists of words include a comma after every word 
      except the last one, such as shoes, ships, ceiling wax, cabbages, and kings.  Note the comma after 
      the word cabbages.  Lists within sentences are identified with small letters and parentheses, as 
      follows: (a) the first point, (b) the second point, (c) a third one, and (d) the final one.  Lists of 
      sentences are treated as separate paragraphs.  (Bulleted lists are rarely appropriate, and should 
      only be used when numbering the items would imply a misleading sense of priority.)  Here is an 
      example of a list of sentences: 
         1. Slide your card quickly in and out of the slot. 
         2. Be sure no one is watching over your shoulder to learn your PIN.  That person could 
      take your card and use the PIN to gain access to your funds. 
         3. Enter your PIN. 
      Numbers 
         Numbers below 10, such as three or nine, are spelled out in letters unless they are page 
      numbers.  Numbers higher than nine are rendered as digits, except at the beginning of a sentence. 
      Apostrophes 
         In spite of popular misconceptions, an apostrophe is never used to pluralize a word.  
      Many CEOs have their bios checked by those with MAs in English.  Contractions are not used in 
      formal writing, and the word it’s should thus never appear.  If you mean it is, write it is.  If you 
      mean the possessive, it is spelled its.  For example, Upper Iowa University has provided its 
      students with a flexible education since 1857. 
      A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER          8 
      Tense 
         Research is referred to in the past tense: “several authors have pointed out…” instead of 
      “several authors point out...”  This is typical in the social sciences and unlike the humanities, in 
      which one might write, “Aristotle takes the opposite position...”  Although the ideas are still 
      current, the study is in the past.  It is safe to assume that a study that has already been designed, 
      conducted, analyzed, written up, reviewed, re-written, and then published is a study that has 
      happened in the past. 
      Gender 
         It has been several decades since it was appropriate to write, “Each manager should 
      check his messages in the morning.”  It is awkward to write, “Each manager should check his or 
      her messages in the morning,” so this form should be used sparingly.  It is ungrammatical (and 
      thus unacceptable) to write, “Each manager should check their messages in the morning.”  With 
      a little thought, we can come up with something clever, such as “Managers should check their 
      messages in the morning,” or “Each manager should check for messages in the morning.”  In the 
      same vein, the word server is better than waitperson as a generic replacement for waiter or 
      waitress.  Of course, if you are referring to one specific person of known gender, it is acceptable 
      to use gendered language. 
                      The Reference List 
         There is a sample reference list at the end of this document, so you can see how the 
      entries are formatted.  Look very carefully at the placement of commas, spaces, italics, and such 
      in each case.  These examples must be followed precisely in order to be correct.  There are many 
      details to consider, but here are some of the basic principles. 
      Principles 
      A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER          9 
         References are arranged alphabetically by the family name of the first author.  If there are 
      multiple authors for one source, the order of those names is not changed to be alphabetical.  
      Works by the same author are listed chronologically, with the earliest source is mentioned first. 
         Like everything else, references are double spaced.  They begin at the left margin and any 
      other lines within the same reference are indented one-half inch.  This is accomplished in 
      Microsoft Word by selecting “hanging indent” from the drop box under “Special” within the 
      “Indents and Spacing” page under the main heading of “Paragraph.”  Each reference is made up 
      of several elements, and the most common cases are described here in some detail.  Consult your 
      Publication Manual for special or exceptional types of references.  
      Elements 
         The first element of a reference is the author’s family name (usually the last name, in 
      America) followed by the initial(s) of the “first” name(s).  Originally, first names were 
      abbreviated to disguise the gender of the author and avoid discrimination.  There is a space after 
      punctuation in APA, so there will be a space between the initials of an author as in Jeremiah, I. 
      C.  If the author is an organization, its name is listed in full.  When there is a source with no 
      author, and when that source is suitable for an academic paper, the reference begins with the title 
      itself. 
         The second element of a reference is the date, in parentheses, followed by a period.  In 
      most cases, that is simply the year (2001).  In the case of a monthly periodical or a conference 
      paper, it includes the year and month (2001, July).  In the case of something like a daily 
      newspaper, it includes the full date (2001, July 5). 
         Unless an entire book is being referred to, the third element is the title of the document, 
      which might be a journal article or book chapter.  Only the first word of the title and subtitle, and 
          A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER                            10 
          any proper nouns, are capitalized.  No italics or quotation marks are used.  If the reference is to 
          an entire book, the third element is the title of the publication, discussed below. 
              In the case of a journal article, the fourth element is its name (the title of the publication).  
          This is presented in italics with all the important words capitalized.  It is followed by a comma 
          and the volume number, both of which are also italicized.  The issue number then appears in 
          parentheses and is not italicized.  There is no space between these elements, so the italicized 
          volume number seems to almost lean against the parentheses that surround the issue number. 
              Please note that the APA has a rule about when to mention the issue number, but I 
          generally invite students to ignore that rule and always report the issue number.  (Students rarely 
          have enough information to decide if a given journal uses serial pagination, and thus whether the 
          issue number is necessary.)  The issue number is followed by a non-italicized comma and the 
          first and last pages of the article.  Each page number is specified in full, such as 131-139 instead 
          of 131-9.  After the name of the journal, no abbreviations (such as p., pp.. or Vol.) are used. 
              In the case of a book section, the fourth element is different.  It is the name of the 
          editor(s), identified by the term (Ed.). or (Eds.).  When referring to a person who is an Editor, an 
                                                       nd
          upper case E is used. When referring to an edition, a lower case e is used (2  ed.). 
              The next element is the name of the book (the title of the publication), which is italicized.  
          Only the first word of the title and subtitle, and any proper nouns, are capitalized.  Sometimes 
          there are other details such as an edition number, volume number, or page numbers of a chapter.  
          These are placed within parentheses at the end of the title.  They are not italicized and are not 
          separated from the title by a comma, and they are followed by a period.  This whole section is 
          followed by the place of publication (city and two-letter state), a colon, and a brief form of the 
          name of the publisher. 
            A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER                                          11 
            DOI 
                           th
                 New to the 6  edition of the Publication Manual, we are using the Digital Object 
            Identifier (doi) to let our readers know where they can find a copy of the article.  There are 
            several examples of that in the reference section.  The doi is preferred instead of a “Retrieved 
            from” statement, which is now recommended only if the content cited is likely to change or be 
            updated (APA Style Guide, 2007, pp. 2, 10).  There are several examples of using this in the next 
            section. 
          A SHORT TITLE FOR YOUR PAPER                            12 
                                    References 
          American Psychological Association. (2007). APA style guide to electronic references. 
              Washington, D.C.: Author. 
          American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American Psychological 
                       th
              Association (6  ed.). Washington, D. C.: Author. 
          Author, N. E. (1999). How to write a great paper: Thoughts and ruminations from the library.  
              International Journal of Regular Capitalization, 39(2), 124-133. 
          Bennett, M. P. (1997). The effect of mirthful laughter on stress and natural killer cell 
              cytotosicity. Dissertation Abstracts International, 58(07-B), 3553. 
                                 th
          Citer, R. (2011). The purpose of life (7  ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill. 
          First, A. B., & Second, C. (1994). The funny bone: Discovered in the brain. Science, 233(6), 
              1040-1132. doi: 10.1126/science.291.5513.2529a 
          First, A. B., Second, C., Third, D., & Fourth, E. F. (1984). Identical twins: Separated at birth. 
              The Journal of Cellular Medicine, 44(1), 114-155. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.10.012 
          First, A. B., Second, C., Third, D., Fourth, E. F., Fifth, G., Sixth, H. I., & Seventh, J. (1955). The 
              perils of Pauline. The Review of Modern Physiology, 13(3), 12-27. doi: 
              10.1103/RevModPhys.74.47 
          Marx, J., Marx, H., Marx, A., & Marx, L. (1984). Jokes and their relation to the cognitive 
              unconscious. In L. Dopa & C. U. Later (Eds.), Cognitive constraints on communication: 
              Representations and processes (Vol. 2, pp. 55-86). Hingham, MA: Reidel. 
          New study shows shocking findings. (2001, August 22). The New York Times, pp. 22A, 48-50. 
